The balance between carbon input and decomposition of organic matter determines
if a ﬁeld is a source or a sink of carbon. There is only one study that reports net
ecosystem exchange of a ﬁeld on mineral soil (Lind et al. 2016) and that represents
cultivation of reed canary grass which is not an especially common crop. Thus, the
available data does not allow for estimation of a full carbon balance of a typical
ﬁeld based on measurements (Table 2.2). Evidence from a 35-year ﬁeld monitoring
points to the direction that cultivated mineral soils on the average lose carbon at an
annual rate about 200 kg/ha (Heikkinen et al. 2013). The estimate was based on
monitoring of about 500 ﬁelds and soil sampling only to 15 cm; thus, it represents
changes in the topsoil only. The authors deduced that the declining trend is related
to warming climate, changes in cropping (less annual crops and varieties with less
crop residues) and the young age of ﬁelds that may be still losing carbon from the
The amount of carbon input depends on choices made in cultivation practices.
Decomposition is mainly driven by the climatic conditions although, e.g. tillage
practices have a role in that as well. Despite the cool climate restricting decom-
position of organic matter, it is likely that conventional agricultural practices result
in loss of carbon from soil in Finnish conditions. A long-term ﬁeld experiment in
the neighbouring country, Sweden, showed that returning only crop residues with
References: 1 (Syvasalo et al. 2006); 2 (Regina et al. 2007); 3 (Syvasalo et al. 2004); 4 (Petersen
et al. 2006); 5 (Sheehy et al. 2013); 6 (Lind et al. 2016); 7 (Regina et al. 2006); 8 (Maljanen et al.
2009); 9 (Virkajarvi et al. 2010); 10 (Maljanen et al. 2012b)
no other amendments usually results in the decline of the carbon stock (Katterer
et al. 2011). Plant breeding tends to develop varieties with less and less crop
residues, which may also complicate maintaining the carbon content of cultivated
soils. However, the amount of above-ground plant litter does not seem to be crucial
for maintaining the carbon stocks of cultivated soils as the removal or burning of
straw did not have an effect in a 30-year ﬁeld experiment in Southern Finland
stock by 20–40%, and the loss of carbon from the soil proﬁle is fastest during the
ﬁrst decades (Guo and Gifford 2002; Karhu et al. 2011). Reaching a new steady
state where the carbon input and its loss are in balance may take several decades,
and thus it is impossible to say how much of the observed carbon loss is due to the
land use change and how much is caused by agricultural management.
Methane is produced microbially in anaerobic conditions and consumed in aerobic
conditions. In soils, the conditions can vary from anaerobic to aerobic in time or
space. The sites of CH4 production are the lower soil layers with low oxygen content
or soil aggregates favouring anaerobic bacteria. Sites of CH4 consumption are the
topsoil or macropores of the soil. Soil micro- or macroporosity was found to affect
the observed rates of CH4 ﬂux in Finnish clay and sandy soils (Regina et al. 2007). In
cultivated soils, the annual balance of CH4 is usually close to zero most often
resulting in more CH4 being consumed than produced. Emissions of CH4 have
been reported to occur occasionally in wet conditions (Regina et al. 2007), but
even then, the annual balance typically indicates net consumption of CH4.
Compared to CO2, the carbon ﬂows related to CH4 are minor (Table 2.2). The
annual ﬂuxes have ranged from −0.12 to 0.06 g m−2 with no clear differences
between annual and perennial cropping can be seen. Grazing has been found to
change pastures from sink to source of CH4 emissions due to CH4 released from the
In cultivated mineral soils, the most signiﬁcant gas in the total greenhouse gas
budget is N2O. Average annual emissions of N2O have been 0.6 g m−2 for annual
(Table 2.2). Annual emissions of N2O are typically slightly higher from annual
cultivation compared to perennial despite the higher fertilization rates on perennial
Perennial crops take up nutrients clearly for a longer period annually compared
to annual crops and that reduces the amount of nitrogen available for the microbes
during the non-vegetated period. The emissions during the period between harvest
and sowing represent about 40% of the annual budget of N2O (Regina et al. 2013)
which highlights the importance of the residual nitrogen after harvest in the absence
of nutrient uptake of plants. The difference between perennial and annual crops may
thus be emphasized in the northern conditions with short growing season of cash
It has been found in many studies that emissions of N2O are not ceased in the
winter time even when the soil is frozen. Availability of nitrate is always good in
cultivated soils, and the low oxygen content favours denitrifying bacteria that can
be active in microsites with unfrozen water of frozen soil (Teepe et al. 2004). One
reason for the high N2O production at low temperatures can be that N2O reductase
enzymatic activity is inhibited (Muller et al. 2003), and therefore the end product of
The timing of freezing and soil water content have important effects on the
emission of N2O (Maljanen et al. 2009; Teepe et al. 2004). Also the depth and
timing of snow cover can affect N2O emissions. Snow manipulation experiments
have shown that thinner snow cover can lower soil temperatures and increase the
extent and duration of soil frost (Maljanen et al. 2009). In frozen soil, N2O is still
produced and accumulated in soil, and it is then rapidly released during thawing
(Koponen and Martikainen 2004; Maljanen et al. 2007a, 2009). The N2O pro-
duction in frozen soil does not correlate well with the N2O emitted from soil as a
result of the low gas diffusion rate. Therefore, the release of N2O during winter does
not give the correct estimate of N2O production activity during the winter.
Fertilization rate, especially the amount of mineral nitrogen, has been found
to affect the annual emissions when studied in subsets of annual and perennial
cropping (Regina et al. 2013). The available data does not allow reliable estimates
of the effects of fertilizer type (mineral/organic) on N2O emissions. Recent evi-
dence shows that external nitrogen inputs induce also emissions of nitric oxide
(NO) and gaseous nitrous acid (HONO) that are not greenhouse gases but reactive
in the atmosphere (Bhattarai et al. 2018; Maljanen et al. 2007b).
There is some evidence that no-till management increases N2O emissions from
cultivated soils (Sheehy et al. 2013). The increase is related to the more dense
structure of the soil and thus higher soil moisture favouring denitriﬁcation.
A probable but poorly known hotspot of N2O emissions are ﬁelds on acid
sulphate soils. They are located on the former sea bottom of the coastal regions and
have large amounts of organic matter in the subsoil due to sedimented materials.
The ﬁeld area on acid sulphate soils is in the range of 43 000–130 000 ha
(Yli-Halla et al. 1999). They are characterized by a large stock of nitrogen and high
microbial activity that may induce extremely high emissions of N2O, even of the
magnitude of tens of kilograms per hectare when drained for agriculture (Simek
et al. 2011, 2014; Petersen et al. 2012; Denmead et al. 2010).
Losses of carbon from organic soils are typically several folds compared to carbon
stock changes in mineral soils. Typically 0.5–2 cm of peat is lost from the topsoil of
cultivated soils due to peat decomposition annually (Gronlund et al. 2008) and that
represents carbon loss of several tonnes per hectare. Although carbon exchange
between the soil and atmosphere forms the majority of the climatic impact of
cultivated organic soils, full carbon balance estimates are still rare. The annual net
ecosystem exchange has varied between −800 and 3000 g m−2 in Finnish studies
(Table 2.3). As the reported values show, even in organic soils photosynthesis may
sometimes exceed carbon loss from the soil, at least in the case of crops with large
biomass. The consideration of the climatic impact must, however, include the
biomass transported from the ﬁeld, and in most cases, this turns the ﬁeld to net
source of carbon even if photosynthesis was able to counteract peat decomposition.
References: 1 (Maljanen et al. 2001); 2 (Lohila et al. 2004); 3 (Maljanen et al. 2004); 4 (Maljanen
et al. 2003a); 5 (Regina et al. 2007); 6 (Maljanen et al. 2003b); 7 (Regina et al. 2004); 8 (Maljanen
et al. 2009); 9 (Maljanen et al. 2010b); 10 (Shurpali et al. 2009)
The existing results suggest lower carbon losses from soils under a perennial
than annual crop. This is related to the less frequent disturbance of the soil as well
as higher carbon input to the soil, especially from high-yielding grass crops.
Similar to mineral soils, ﬂuxes of CH4 are close to zero also in drained organic soils
(Table 2.3). The mean value for annual crops is slightly negative indicating oxi-
dation of CH4 in the topsoil, whereas it seems that net production of CH4 is more
common in the denser and moister soil under perennial crops. Periods of wet soil
conditions have been found to increase the net ﬂux occasionally as reported, e.g. by
Drainage level and functioning of the drains affect soil moisture status and thus
largely determine the ﬂux rates of CH4. In two ﬁelds with similar cultivation
practices, the ﬁeld with poorly functioning drainage had mainly net emissions
during a 2-year monitoring period, whereas its well-drained counterpart showed net
Emissions from open ditches can have a large impact on the total greenhouse
balance of a drained peatland (Schrier-Uijl et al. 2011; Minkkinen and Laine 2006).
There are limited data on these emissions from Finnish croplands (Hyvonen et al.
2013). As it is known that the nutrient status of the drained area greatly affects the
emission rate, it is likely that the open ditches around nutrient-rich cultivated ﬁelds
are a high source of CH4 emissions. However, most ﬁelds are subsurface drained,
and the signiﬁcance of these emissions is likely minor in the country scale.
In organic soil, peat decomposition is the main source of N2O emissions and
fertilization has minor importance. Mineralization of nitrogen from the peat can
have the magnitude of several hundreds of kilograms per hectare annually, and this
enables relatively high emission rates of N2O regardless of fertilization (Leppelt
et al. 2014). The annual emissions of N2O have varied between 0.04 and
5.47 g m−2 in Finnish measurements (Table 2.3). The annual emissions are thus
The average annual emission rates have been higher for annual than perennial
crops indicating tighter nitrogen cycle in the case of perennial grasses that are able
to take up nutrients until late autumn and are tilled less frequently.
Like in mineral soils, the residual nitrogen after harvest is a substrate for N2O
production during the winter period, and about half of the annual emissions can
occur between harvest and sowing. Climatic conditions in the winter have a large
effect on the annual emissions. It was observed that a warm period in the winter that
melted 10 cm of the frost induced a 100-fold increase in N2O concentration of the
soil proﬁle (Regina et al. 2004). There was a clear difference to a similarly managed
